Draft for PR description (#220)
cosmo-epfl/librascal: docs/source/dev_guide/review_process.rst

a busy time with a lot of changes on the master branch which are unrelated to
you, do not hesitate to contact us if the any issues arise *after* your PR has
been approved. While we discourage changes after the PR has been approved,
sometimes it is necessary to be able to merge with master. There are no rules to
make this easy so please decide on the basis of the fact that we want a clean
compiling master branch. To elaborate on this, here are a few examples

 * A PR is approved but there are still changes added afterwards. While this can
   not be avoided completely, it should not be the norm. As the PR requester and
   if the changes are not only of cosmetic nature, as a courtesy please ask the
   approving reviewer again for feedback on the changes.

 * Changes due to merge or rebase with master because the master branch changed
   can not be avoided. If the PR was approved, master changed and the result are
   conflicts with the PR, this of course has to be solved. Again, as a courtesy,
   please ask for feedback on the changes again because merges/rebases can be
   complicated and we want to avoid a broken master branch.

> **TL;DR**

Reviewer: Let's merge this with the `CONTRIBUTING.md`, which can serve as a short reference (it's shown to potential contributors on opening their first pull request). That document should, in turn, link to here for the full description.

Author: Yes, good idea. How do I make sure it is compiled into an html?
The links are hardcoded, right?

Reviewer: The `CONTRIBUTING` file can link to the online HTML documentation (since it will need to be followable from github, effectively an external site).

Not sure about the link in the other direction, since the CONTRIBUTING file isn't compiled as part of the doc build. You could have a look at `index.rst` which includes sections of the `README` for one way to do it (if you just want to automatically paste the summary points to the bottom of the `review_process` page). It would also be good to just reference the file by name near the beginning of the document.

multiple changes and continous feedback, others can be merged in flawlessly. So
this text should communicate our intent and style and not be a go/no-go
situation.

After successfully adding a new feature, doing maintenance, sorting out a bug or
adding new documentation, in short: contributing to the codebase in any form,
the tests we have employed should all pass. These include tests for
functionality on the C++ as well as the python side but also include checks for
code style as far as they can be automated (see our :ref:`Conding convention
<coding-convention>` for details on the style). We also have a custom target for
make to help with autoformatting C++ as well as Python code.

Further, we provide a PR template on github with several checkmarks to help
start and streamline the process. Please make use of it and get rid of all
unnecessary points, which just globber the PR message. To make it easy for
possible reviewers do not hesitate to contact any of the people invovled in the
development of librascal also beforehand. Some thing are easier to talk about in
person.

So once you have added something to the code base and checked locally if the

> checks pass merged and/or rebase on top of the current state of the master

Reviewer 2: I am not sure what this means. Is it "one should merge/rebase on top of master and then check that the tests pass?"

Author: I reformulated it, hope this is clearer now.

Reviewer 2: Yep, thanks!

.. _review_process:

.. contents::
   :local:

Review process
--------------

This short description should serve as a rough guideline on how we deal with
reviews on pull requests (PR). Some PRs are easy, others are hard. Some require
multiple changes and continous feedback, others can be merged in flawlessly. So

> this text should communicate our intent and style and not be a go/no-go

Reviewer: Remove "So", or change to "Therefore". Also, "go/no-go" is unclear; perhaps "instead of being a strict set of rules". Also, instead of "should communicate", maybe "the purpose of this text is to communicate" is stronger.

situation.

After successfully adding a new feature, doing maintenance, sorting out a bug or
adding new documentation, in short: contributing to the codebase in any form,
the tests we have employed should all pass. These include tests for
functionality on the C++ as well as the python side but also include checks for

> code style as far as they can be automated (see our :ref:`Conding convention

Reviewer: "Coding convention" (typo)

<coding-convention>` for details on the style). We also have a custom target for
make to help with autoformatting C++ as well as Python code.

Further, we provide a PR template on github with several checkmarks to help
start and streamline the process. Please make use of it and get rid of all
unnecessary points, which just globber the PR message. To make it easy for

> possible reviewers do not hesitate to contact any of the people invovled in the

Reviewer: Not sure I like the wording of these last two sentences. First, we want to emphasize that the PR checklist is the _main_ thing you can do to make it easier for potential reviewers. Second, we want to say that you should also feel free to contact the librascal developers about a PR if you're unsure about something.

But I think we should rather encourage PRs as a way of _starting_ the conversation about a new feature or change, and encourage draft PRs (as I wrote in the contribution guidelines!) rather than just opening a branch and letting it rot.

Finally, it's a bit unfair to mention things being "easier to talk about in person" when we might soon have collaborators in other parts of the world who have no possibility of talking to us in person (meaning: face to face). It's fine to say "don't hesitate to contact us", but I'd leave out the bit about conversations in person, since we all pretty much know that already.

Reviewer: Oh, and "involved" (typo) if you decide to keep it

development of librascal also beforehand. Some thing are easier to talk about in
person.

> So once you have added something to the code base and checked locally if the

Reviewer: Remove "So". Also: sentence fragment; change "checked" to "please check" (or better: "please run all the checks locally and ensure they pass")

> checks pass. Checks include the code tests as well as the checks for coding

Reviewer: "These checks include". Also, "checks" gets used a lot (with slightly different meanings), maybe keep "tests" as above

> style as far as they can be checked automatically. You should also have added

Reviewer: Keep present tense, as it's clearer and more direct: "You should also add"

> tests for your added functionality or adjusted tests, which conflict with a new

Reviewer: "functionality. Likewise, if your changes break existing tests, be sure to update (not disable!) the affected tests so that they pass."

> design. The next step is to merge or rebase with the master branch. If

Reviewer: Just "Next, merge with the master branch." We don't want to be encouraging rebases unless it turns out it's necessary; also, a single final rebase will remove any extraneous merge commits.

Reviewer 2: I disagree here: one should rebase before submitting a PR, to create it with a nice history. Once the PR is created, merges are fine since Github interface plays poorly with force pushes.

Author: I tend to agree with Luthaf. Added a bracket-note to contact us if unsure which way.

necessary, add changes to the code to comply with any other added tests coming
in from the updated master branch if they were not resolved in the merging or

> rebase process. Then you are ready to create your PR. Upon creating the PR our

Reviewer: Here I disagree with the procedure itself: We should encourage creating PRs _as soon as the feature is ready for discussion_, not once all the technical checks have passed. If you want to put some changes up for discussion but don't have all the technical details sorted yet, then it's fine to make a draft PR (in fact, we should encourage it). This has the further advantage that the CI is run sooner, catching errors that the contributor might not have seen.

> continuous integration spins up and does further checks with different compilers

Reviewer: Remove "spins up", it just runs a rigorous series of checks with different build parameters.

and compiling modes such as debug.

> Now it is time for review. Github provides a button for review requests. Most of

Reviewer: Style: "Once your PR is ready for review (all items on the checklist are completed), use the Github button to notify specific developers to review the changes."

the time the suggested persons for review are a good first address. Add some so that they are notified.

To help speed up the process we follow some rough guidelines so you know what

> you can expect from a reviewer's role and we know what we have to do:

Reviewer: Just "so everyone knows what to expect from a reviewer's role"

 #. If someone starts a review, this person is the go-to person to finish the
    review on the PR and should see it through as fast as possible. This means
    following up the the requested changes and staying part of the

>     discussion. And it also includes the approval in the end. As fast as

Reviewer: Stronger: "Once the reviewers' concerns have been addressed, this person is responsible for approving them as soon as possible. This not only ensures that the changes are available to everyone as soon as they are ready, but also minimizes further merges with master and the associated extra work."

    possible is often the best way to avoid having to re-merge with the master
    branch if it is changing.

 #. Single comments without actually providing a review are allowed and
    encouraged, but should be used sparsely. They can be really helpful if
    something might be overseen. But if you want changes and involve yourself in
    the process, make a proper review and take the responsibility to see it
    through.

> Sometimes there is a lot of commit noise and the master changes and sometimes

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this means. Is this paragraph meant to warn about the difficulties that can arise _after_ review?

the proper order of PR, Review, Requested Changed, remerge, etc. can be
cumbersome. There are no rules to make this easy so please decide on the basis
of the fact that we want a clean compiling master branch. To elaborate on this,
here are a few examples

 #. A PR is approved but there are still changes added afterwards. While this
    can not be avoided completely, it should not be the norm. As the PR
    requester and if the changes are not only of cosmetic nature, as a courtesy
    please ask the approving reviewer again for feedback on the changes.

 #. Changes due to merge or rebase with master because the master branch changed
    can not be avoided. If the PR was approved, master changed and the result
    are conflicts with the PR, this of course has to be solved. Again, as a
    courtesy, please ask for feedback on the changes again because
    merges/rebases can be complicated and we want to avoid a broken master

>     branch.

Reviewer: Perhaps add "At the very least, make sure that all the CI checks pass before merging." (to avoid a borked master)

.. _review_process:

.. contents::
   :local:

Review process
--------------

This short description should serve as a rough guideline on how we deal with
reviews on pull requests (PR). Some PRs are easy, others are hard. Some require
multiple changes and continuous feedback, others can be merged in
flawlessly. The purpose of this text is to communicate our intent and style and

> should not be seen as *law*.

Reviewer: Add: "A summary of these guidelines can be found in `CONTRUBTING.rst` in the top level of the repository. If you haven't yet read that file, it would be a good idea to do that now."

After successfully adding a new feature, doing maintenance, sorting out a bug or
adding new documentation, in short: contributing to the codebase in any form,
you should ensure that all existing and new tests pass. These include tests for
functionality on the C++ as well as the python side but also include tests for

> code style as far as they can be automated (see our :ref:`Coding convention

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
code style as far as they can be automated for which the custom command is ``make lint`` (see our :ref:`Coding convention
```

> <coding-convention>` for details on the style). We also have a custom ``make``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<coding-convention>` for details on the style). We also have a custom ``make pretty-cpp`` and ``make pretty-python``
```

target to help with autoformatting C++ as well as Python code.

Further, we provide a PR template on Github with several checkmarks to help
start and streamline the review process. Please make use of it, although you can
remove points that are irrelevant to the PR. This template is intended to help
you in preparing your contribution for the review process and includes the main
points most commonly raised by reviewers. Also we highly encourage the use of
the *Draft* PR functionality Github provides. We see it as a way to start a
discussion about the contribution and the proposed changes and it does not have
to be polished at that stage. The difference between a Draft PR and a normal PR
is minor. The Draft stage signals that your contribution is not ready for review

> but up for discussion. But it is nevertheless treated by like a normal PR in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but up for discussion. But it is nevertheless treated like a normal PR in the
```

sense that all the continuous integration tools are applied and there is an
immediate feedback from automatic tests. Do not hesitate to contact us at any
stage if you are unsure about anything.

Once you have added something to the code base, please check locally if the
tests pass. These tests include the code tests as well as the tests for code
style as far as they can be checked automatically. You should also add tests for

> new functionality. Likewise, if your changes break existing tests, be sure to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
new functionalities. Likewise, if your changes break existing tests, be sure to
```

Reviewer: Actually, the previous one was correct; "functionality" can't be pluralized in this context.

the Github button to notify specific developers to review the changes.

To help speed up the process we follow some rough guidelines so everyone knows
what to expect from a reviewer's role:

 * The first person to leave a full review becomes the responsible reviewer for
   that PR.

 * Once the reviewers' concerns have been addressed, the same person is
   responsible for approving them as soon as possible. This not only ensures
   that the changes are available to everyone as soon as they are ready, but
   also minimizes the need for further merges with master and associated extra
   work.

 * Single comments without actually providing a review are allowed and
   encouraged, but should be used sparsely. They can be really helpful if
   something might be overseen. But if you want changes and involve yourself in
   the process, make a proper review and take the responsibility to see it
   through.

 * If you are a reviewer and you start adding changes yourself (excluding the
   one-line propositions that Github provides or just cosmetics) another person
   should become the reviewer. This is to ensure that any part is reviewed by
   someone else other than the creator.

> A last note related to our own experience. If it happens that your PR falls into

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A last note related to our own experiences. If it happens that your PR falls into
```

Reviewer: Again, "experience" was correct.

Author: Well this one did not change. I reverted the functionalities.

Reviewer: Ok cool, I didn't see that the suggestion hadn't actually been committed.

a busy time with a lot of changes on the master branch which are unrelated to
you, do not hesitate to contact us if the any issues arise *after* your PR has
been approved. While we discourage changes after the PR has been approved,
sometimes it is necessary to be able to merge with master. There are no rules to

> make this easy so please decide on the basis of the fact that we want a clean

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
make this easy so please make sure to keep a 'clean' and
```

Reviewer: Eh... I'd remove the quotes around "clean"

Reviewer: Same here (didn't see that the suggestion wasn't taken)

> compiling master branch. To elaborate on this, here are a few examples

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
functional master branch. To elaborate on this, here are a few examples
```
